new structure for directives page (#140)
neo4j/docs-graphql: modules/ROOT/pages/type-definitions/directives/custom-logic.adoc

:description: This page describes how to use directives for custom logic.
:page-aliases: type-definitions/cypher.adoc, type-definitions/default-values.adoc, ogm/examples/custom-resolvers.adoc, custom-resolvers.adoc
= Custom logic

== `@cypher`

The `@cypher` directive binds a GraphQL field to the results of a Cypher query.
This directive can be used both for properties in a type or as top level queries.

=== Global variables

> Global variables are available for use within the Cypher statement and can be applied to the `@cypher` directive.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Global variables are available for use within the Cypher statement, and can be applied to the `@cypher` directive.
```

[cols="1,2,2"]
|===
| Variable | Description | Example

| `this`

> | This value is a reference to the currently resolved node, and it can be used to traverse the graph.

Reviewer: In order to avoid the repetition of "this value" in the following item:

```suggestion
| Refers to the currently resolved node, and can be used to traverse the graph.
```

    isAuthenticated: boolean;
    roles?: string[];
    jwt: any;
}
----
a| You can use the JWT in the request to return the value of the currently logged in User:
[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type User {
    id: String
}

type Query {
    me: User @cypher(
        statement: """
        MATCH (user:User {id: $jwt.sub})
        RETURN user
        """,
        columnName: "user"
    )
}
----

| `cypherParams`
| Use it to inject values into the Cypher query from the GraphQL context function.
a| Inject into context:
[source, typescript, indent=0]
----
const server = new ApolloServer({
    typeDefs,
});

await startStandaloneServer(server, {
    context: async ({ req }) => ({ cypherParams: { userId: "user-id-01" } }),
});
----

Use in Cypher query:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Query {
    userPosts: [Post] @cypher(statement: """
        MATCH (:User {id: $userId})-[:POSTED]->(p:Post)
        RETURN p
    """, columnName: "p")
}
----
|===

=== Return values

The return value of Cypher statements must always be of the same type to which the directive is applied.

The variable must also be aliased with a name that is the same as the one passed to `columnName`.

> This can be the name of a node, relationship query or an alias in the `RETURN` statement of the Cypher statement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be the name of a node, relationship query, or an alias in the `RETURN` statement of the Cypher statement.
```

==== Scalar values

Cypher statements must return a value which matches the scalar type to which the directive was applied.
For example:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Query {
    randomNumber: Int @cypher(statement: "RETURN rand() as result", columnName: "result")
}
----

==== Object types

When returning an object type, all fields of the type must be available in the Cypher return value. 
This can be achieved by either returning the entire object from the Cypher query, or returning a map of the fields which are required for the object type. 

> Both approaches are demonstrated below:

Reviewer: Style guide suggests that we don't use adverbs like below or above etc

```suggestion
Both approaches are here demonstrated:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type User {
    id
}

type Query {
    users: [User]
        @cypher(
            statement: """
            MATCH (u:User)
            RETURN u
            """,
            columnName: "u"
        )
}
----

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type User {
    id
}

type Query {
    users: [User] @cypher(statement: """
        MATCH (u:User)
        RETURN {
            id: u.id
        } as result
    """, columnName: "result")
}
----

The downside of the latter approach is that you need to adjust the return object as you change your object type definition.

=== Input arguments

> The `@cypher` statement can access the query parameters by prepending `$` to the parameter name. For example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `@cypher` statement can access the query parameters by prepending `$` to the parameter name. 
For example:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Query {
    name(value: String): String @cypher(statement: "RETURN $value AS res", columnName: "res")
}
----

The following GraphQL query returns the parameter `value`:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
query {
  name(value: "Jane Smith")
}
----

=== Usage examples

The `@cypher` directive can be used in different contexts, such as the ones described in this section.

[[type-definitions-cypher-object-usage]]
==== On an object type field

> In the example below, a field `similarMovies` is bound to the `Movie` type, to find other movies with an overlap of actors:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following example, the field `similarMovies` is bound to the `Movie` type for finding other movies with an overlap of actors:
```

    similarMovies(limit: Int = 10): [Movie]
        @cypher(
            statement: """
            MATCH (this)<-[:ACTED_IN]-(:Actor)-[:ACTED_IN]->(rec:Movie)
            WITH rec, COUNT(*) AS score ORDER BY score DESC
            RETURN rec LIMIT $limit
            """,
            columnName: "rec"
        )
}
----

==== On a query type field

The following example demonstrates a query to return all of the actors in the database:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Actor {
    actorId: ID!
    name: String
}

type Query {
    allActors: [Actor]
        @cypher(
            statement: """
            MATCH (a:Actor)
            RETURN a
            """,
            columnName: "a"
        )
}
----

==== On a mutation type field

The following example demonstrates a mutation using a Cypher query to insert a single actor with the specified name argument:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Actor {
    actorId: ID!
    name: String
}

type Mutation {
    createActor(name: String!): Actor
        @cypher(
            statement: """
            CREATE (a:Actor {name: $name})
            RETURN a
            """,
            columnName: "a"
        )
}
----

== `@coalesce`

> When translating from GraphQL to Cypher, any instances of fields to which this directive is applied will be wrapped in a `coalesce()` function in the WHERE clause (see https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/understanding-non-existent-properties-and-null-values/#_use_coalesce_to_use_a_default_for_a_null_value).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When translating from GraphQL to Cypher, any instances or fields to which this directive is applied will be wrapped in a `coalesce()` function in the `WHERE` clause. 
For more information, see link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/understanding-non-existent-properties-and-null-values/#_use_coalesce_to_use_a_default_for_a_null_value[Understanding non-existent properties and working with nulls].
```

This directive helps querying against non-existent properties in a database. 

> However, it is encouraged to populate these properties with meaningful values if this is becoming the norm. The `@coalesce`directive is a primitive implementation of the function which only takes a static default value as opposed to using another property in a node or a Cypher expression.

Reviewer: This could perhaps become a note:

```suggestion
However, it is encouraged to populate these properties with meaningful values if it becomes the norm. 
The `@coalesce`directive is a primitive implementation of the function which only takes a static default value as opposed to using another property in a node or a Cypher expression.
```

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
"""Int | Float | String | Boolean | ID | DateTime | Enum"""
scalar ScalarOrEnum

"""Instructs @neo4j/graphql to wrap the property in a coalesce() function during queries, using the single value specified."""
directive @coalesce(
    """The value to use in the coalesce() function. Must be a scalar type and must match the type of the field with which this directive decorates."""
    value: Scalar!,
) on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

=== Usage

> `@coalesce` may be used with enums. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`@coalesce` may be used with `enums`. 
```

> When setting the default value for an enum field, it must be one of the enumerated enum values:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When setting the default value for an `enum` field, it must be one of the enumerated `enum` values:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
enum Status {
    ACTIVE
    INACTIVE
}
type Movie {
    status: Status @coalesce(value: ACTIVE)
}
----

[[type-definitions-default-values-limit]]
== `@limit`

Available on nodes, this directive injects values into a query such as the `limit`.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
"""The `@limit` is to be used on nodes, where applied will inject values into a query such as the `limit`."""
directive @limit(
    default: Int
    max: Int
) on OBJECT
----

=== Usage

The directive has two arguments:

* `default` - if no `limit` argument is passed to the query, the default limit is used. 
The query may still pass a higher or lower `limit`.
* `max` - defines the maximum limit to be passed to the query. 
If a higher value is passed, it is used instead. 

> If no `default` value is set, `max` is used for queries without limit.

Reviewer: Maybe this sentence could become a note indented to the list

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
{
  Movie @limit(amount: 5) {
    title
    year
  }
}
----

== `@customResolver`

The Neo4j GraphQL Library generates query and mutation resolvers, so you don't need to implement them yourself.
However, if you need additional behaviors besides the autogenerated CRUD operations, you can specify custom resolvers for these scenarios.

> This page describes how to set them up.

Reviewer: The page is not just about that, so I would remove this sentence

```suggestion
```

> To add a field to an object type which is resolved from existing values in the type, rather than storing new values, you should mark it with the `@customResolver` directive and define a custom resolver for it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add a field to an object type which is resolved from existing values in the type, rather than storing new values, you should mark it with the `@customResolver` directive, and define a custom resolver for it.
```

Take, for instance, this schema:

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
const typeDefs = `
    type User {
        firstName: String!
        lastName: String!
        fullName: String! @customResolver(requires: "firstName lastName")
    }
`;

const resolvers = {
    User: {
        fullName(source) {
            return `${source.firstName} ${source.lastName}`;
        },
    },
};

const neoSchema = new Neo4jGraphQL({
    typeDefs,
    resolvers,
});
----

Here `fullName` is a value that is resolved from the fields `firstName` and `lastName`. 

> Specifying the `@customResolver` directive on the field definition keeps `fullName` from being included in any `Query` or `Mutation` fields and hence as a property on the `:User` node in the database.

Reviewer: Bringing back the discussion about capitalizing terms like query and mutation or using this formatting.

Author: i used lower case, following graphql.org and apollographql.com

The inclusion of the fields `firstName` and `lastName` in the `requires` argument means that, in the definition of the resolver, the properties `firstName` and `lastName` will always be defined on the `source` object. 
If these fields are not specified, this cannot be guaranteed.

=== Definition

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
"""Informs @neo4j/graphql that a field will be resolved by a custom resolver, and allows specification of any field dependencies."""
directive @customResolver(
    """Selection set of the fields that the custom resolver will depend on. These fields are passed as an object to the first argument of the custom resolver."""
    requires: SelectionSet
) on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

=== The `requires` argument

> This is how the `requires` argument can be used on your schema:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `requires` argument can be used:
```

> * Accepts a selection set string.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For a selection set string.
```

> * Can be used in any field, as long as it is not another `@customResolver` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In any field, as long as it is not another `@customResolver` field.
```

> * Should be used in case the custom resolver depends on any fields.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* In case the custom resolver depends on any fields.
```

This ensures that, during the Cypher generation process, these properties are selected from the database.

Using a selection set string makes it possible to select fields from related types, as shown in the following example:

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
const typeDefs = `
    type Address {
        houseNumber: Int!
        street: String!
        city: String!
    }

    type User {
        id: ID!
        firstName: String!
        lastName: String!
        address: Address! @relationship(type: "LIVES_AT", direction: OUT)
        fullName: String
            @customResolver(requires: "firstName lastName address { city street }")
    }
`;

const resolvers = {
    User: {
        fullName({ firstName, lastName, address }) {
            return `${firstName} ${lastName} from ${address.street} in ${address.city}`;
        },
    },
};

const neoSchema = new Neo4jGraphQL({
    typeDefs,
    resolvers,
});
----

> Here the `firstName`, `lastName`, `address.street`, and `address.city` fields are always selected from the database if the `fullName` field is selected and is available to the custom resolver.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here the `firstName`, `lastName`, `address.street`, and `address.city` fields are always selected from the database if the `fullName` field is selected, and is available to the custom resolver.
```

It is also possible to inline fragments to conditionally select fields from interface/union types:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
interface Publication {
    publicationYear: Int!
}

type Author {
    name: String!
    publications: [Publication!]! @relationship(type: "WROTE", direction: OUT)
    publicationsWithAuthor: [String!]!
        @customResolver(
            requires: "name publications { publicationYear ...on Book { title } ... on Journal { subject } }"
        )
}

type Book implements Publication {
    title: String!
    publicationYear: Int!
    author: [Author!]! @relationship(type: "WROTE", direction: IN)
}

type Journal implements Publication {
    subject: String!
    publicationYear: Int!
    author: [Author!]! @relationship(type: "WROTE", direction: IN)
}
----

However, it is **not** possible to require extra fields generated by the library such as aggregations and connections.

> For example, the type definitions below would throw an error as they attempt to require the `publicationsAggregate`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the following type definitions would throw an error since they attempt to require the `publicationsAggregate`:
```

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
interface Publication {
    publicationYear: Int!
}

type Author {
    name: String!
    publications: [Publication!]! @relationship(type: "WROTE", direction: OUT)
    publicationsWithAuthor: [String!]!
        @customResolver(
            requires: "name publicationsAggregate { count }"
        )
}

type Book implements Publication {
    title: String!
    publicationYear: Int!
    author: [Author!]! @relationship(type: "WROTE", direction: IN)
}

type Journal implements Publication {
    subject: String!
    publicationYear: Int!
    author: [Author!]! @relationship(type: "WROTE", direction: IN)
}
----

== `@populatedBy`

> This directive is used to specify a callback function that gets executed during GraphQL query parsing,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This directive is used to specify a callback function, which is executed during GraphQL query parsing,
```

directive @populatedBy(
    """The name of the callback function."""
    callback: String!
    """Which events to invoke the callback on."""
    operations: [PopulatedByOperation!]! = [CREATE, UPDATE]
) on FIELD_DEFINITION
----

=== Usage

Type definitions:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Product {
    name: String!
    slug: String! @populatedBy(callback: "slug", operations: [CREATE, UPDATE])
}
----

Schema construction (note that the callback is asynchronous):

[source, javascript, indent=0]
----
const slugCallback = async (root) => {
    return `${root.name}_slug`
}

new Neo4jGraphQL({
    typeDefs,
    driver,
    features: { 
        populatedBy: {
            callbacks: {
                slug: slugCallback
            } 
        }
    }
})
----

== Context values

The GraphQL context for the request is available as the third argument in a callback. 
This maps to the argument pattern for GraphQL resolvers.

For example, if you want a field `modifiedBy`:

[source, graphql, indent=0]
----
type Record {
    content: String!
    modifiedBy: @populatedBy(callback: "modifiedBy", operations: [CREATE, UPDATE])
}
----

> If the username is located in `context.username`, you could define a callback such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And if the username is located in `context.username`, you could define a callback such as:
```
